## Context

{{Needs a nice quote about the definition of NLP}}

This focus of this paper is Natural Language Processing—abbreviated as NLP throughout. NLP is related to human--computer interaction. NLP concerns itself with enabling machines to understand human language. Human language, a medium in which humans understand quite easily, can be difficult for machines.

That understanding of human language by machines is quite difficult, is depicted by one of the first application of NLP was during the Georgetown-IBM experiment, where a Russian-english machine translation system was showcased in New York in 1945[@hutchins-john-georgetown-ibm-system]. More than sixty sentences were translated from Russian to English. The experiment was well publicised in the press, and resulted in optimism about machine-translation being a solved problem within three five years. The results in the following ten years were disappointing and eventually led to reduced funding.

Machine translation is just one of many major tasks involved with NLP. Other applications include automatic summarisation (generating a summary), named entity recognition (detecting references to people or places), sentiment analysis (extracting opinion), and many major tasks.

Summarisation, named entity recognition, and sentiment analyses could all be classified as information extraction comprising an extraction pipeline. For example, the extraction pipeline of linking references in a text pipeline[^1] could be as follows for entity linking[@stanbol-enhancer-nlp]:

```

- Detect the input language — **Language Detection**: Based on the language of the given text, the algorithms behind the following steps will change significantly.
- Optionally break sentences — **Sentence Tokenisation**: Breaking sentences can elevate performance and heighten accuracy of the following stages, in particular POS tagging.
- Breaking words — **Word Tokenisation**: To detect entities, one must of course break those entities (words) free from their surroundings.
- Detecting word-categories — **Part-of-Speech Tagging**: When linking entities in an encyclopaedia, one would typically not want to link every entity to another entry, but most often only nouns or even proper nouns. POS tagging helps make that decision.
- Optionally detecting noun phrases — **Noun Phrase Detection**: Although "apple" and "juice" are both words and could both be linked to separate entities, it would be more apt to link both words to one entity: "apple juice", noun phrase detection helps here.
- Optionally detecting lemmas or stems — **Lemmatisation or Stemming**: All forms of walk could link to the same entity, be it "walk", "walked", or "walking", detecting the lemma or stem for a word makes this possible.
- Linking the possible entities to their reference — **Entity Linking**

```

Although many different fields are covered by NLP, the process of reaching those goals touches on some well defined stages as seen above.

[@stanbol-enhancer-nlp]: http://stanbol.apache.org/docs/trunk/components/enhancer/nlp/

[^1]: A pipeline in this paper is defined as "a set of processes chained by their standard streams".
