
\gls{nlp}, a field of computer science, artificial intelligence, and linguistics concerned with the interactions between computers and human languages [@wikipedia-natural-language-processing], is becoming increasingly important in society. For example, search engines try to answer before a question is given, the NSA detects terrorist-toned motifs in text messages, and e-mail applications know if a user forgot to attach an attachment.

However, to date, web developers trying to solve \gls{nlp} problems reinvent the wheel over and over again. There are certainly tools (especially for other platforms. such as Python [@nltk-source] and Java [@opennlp-source]) trying to solve this, but they either take a too naive approach[^introduction-1], or try to do everything out of the box[^introduction-2]. What is missing is a standard for multipurpose natural language analysis—a standard representation of the grammatical hierarchy of text.

For over a year I too have camped with the previously mentioned problem. I have tried to solve it, to no avail, on numerous occasions. During the creation of this thesis I developed a well thought out and substantiated solution, which solves the previously mentioned problems.

The in this thesis introduced implementation Retext (and other projects in the Retext family) are a new approach to the syntax of natural text. My goal in this paper is to design an extensible system for multipurpose analysis of language.

To achieve this goal, I have organized my paper into X main sections

In the first section ...
In the second section, ...

I end my paper with a third section that offers ...

...and conclude with a fourth section that ...

I also include an appendix after the References that contains ...

Before I can begin the examination of ..., however, I need to provide ... {next section}

[^introduction-1]: For example, ignoring white space [See @loadfive/knwl-source-code], punctuation, or implementing a naive definition of "words" [@nhunzaker/speakeasy-source-code], or by deploying a less than adequate algorithm to detect sentences [@nytimes/emphasis-source-code].

[^introduction-2]: Although a do-all library works well on server-side platforms, it fares less well on the web [@NaturalNode/natural-source-code], where modularity and frugality are in order.
